\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename ilist.info
@settitle IList
@c %**end of header
@copying
Display a list in an Ibuffer way.

Copyright @copyright{} 2021  Durand

@quotation
Permission is granted to copy, distribute and/or modify this document
under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License, Version 1.3
or any later version published by the Free Software Foundation;
with no Invariant Sections, no Front-Cover Texts, and no Back-Cover Texts.
A copy of the license is included in the section entitled ``GNU
Free Documentation License''.

A copy of the license is also available from the Free Software
Foundation Web site at @url{https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html}.

@end quotation

The document was typeset with
@uref{https://www.gnu.org/software/texinfo/, GNU Texinfo}.

@end copying

@titlepage
@title IList
@subtitle Display a list in an Ibuffer way.
@author Durand <mmemmew@@gmail.com>
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying
@end titlepage

@c Output the table of the contents at the beginning.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top, About, (dir), (dir)
@top IList

@insertcopying
@end ifnottex

@c Generate the nodes for this menu with `C-c C-u C-m'.
@menu
* About::
* Entry point::
* Mapping over lines::
* Moving::
* Copying This Manual::
* Index::
@end menu

@c Update all node entries with `C-c C-u C-n'.
@c Insert new nodes with `C-c C-c n'.
@node About, Entry point, Top, Top
@chapter About

This is a little library package that can @emph{display a list in an
Ibuffer fashion}.  The core functionality it provides is a function that
can accept a list, and produce a string showing the contents of the list
according to the specifications of columns, groups, and sorters.

@node Entry point, Mapping over lines, About, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Entry point

The one main function this package provides is @code{ilist-string}.
It is called as follows.

@lisp
(ilist-string LIST COLUMNS GROUPS DISCARD-EMPTY-P)
@end lisp

@table @code
@item LIST
This denotes the list that the user wants to display.
@item COLUMNS
@itemx GROUPS
They are described in the following sections.
@item DISCARD-EMPTY-P
This determines whether to display empty groups or not.
@item SORTER
This is either nil, or a function with two arguments which returns
non-nil if and only if the first argument should be sorted before the
second argument.
@item NO-TRAILING-SPACE
This is non-nil if the function should not produce trailing
whitespaces.
@end table

@menu
* Columns::
* Groups::
@end menu

@node Columns, Groups, Entry point, Entry point
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Columns

Like in Ibuffer, the user can specify columns to display.  Each column
comprises the following specifications:

@table @code
@item NAME
The name to display in the header.
@item FUN
A function that will be given the elements of the list (one at a time)
that should return a string as the representation of that element in
this column.
@item MIN
@itemx MAX
The minimal (resp. maximal) width this column takes.
@item ALIGN
Either :left, :right, or :center.  How the contents of the column are
aligned.
@item ELIDE
If the content of an element takes more space than the MAX, whether to
substitute the last few characters of that content by a fixed
@emph{eliding string}.  If this ELIDE is not a string, then it means
not to elide, but to truncate the contents.
@end table

@node Groups,  , Columns, Entry point
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@section Groups

The first subsection of this section describes the specifications of
groups.  And the second describes a planned feature that is not yet
implemented.

@menu
* Fixed groups::
* Automatic groups (planned)::
@end menu

@node Fixed groups, Automatic groups (planned), Groups, Groups
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Fixed groups

Like in Ibuffer, we can group elements together in the display.  One
difference with Ibuffer is that elements that are not in any group are
ignored.  If one wants a "default" group, specify that explicitly.  The
specifications of @code{GROUPS} are as follows.

@table @code
@item NAME
The name of the group.  This will be enclosed in square brackets and
displayed on a separate line.
@item FUN
A function with one argument.  If the function returns non-nil, then
that element is considered to pertain to the group.
@end table

So a default group just uses a function that always returns @code{t},
and is put at the end of the list @code{GROUPS}.

Empty groups might or might not be displayed, depending on the value
of @code{DISCARD-EMPTY-P}.

@node Automatic groups (planned),  , Fixed groups, Groups
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@subsection Automatic groups (planned)

I plan to add support for automatic groups.  This means that, instead
of providing a list of groups, one provides a function with one
argument.  That argument will be fed the list of elements.  Then the
function is supposed to return a list of the following form:

@lisp
(list
 (NAME
  (INDEX1 . ELEMENT1)
  (INDEX2 . ELEMENT2)
  ...)
 ...)
@end lisp

That is, it should return cons cells of indices and elements, where
the indices mean the indices of the corresponding element, in the
original list.

Then the user can provide functions to automatically group elements
based on the criteria that fit the domain of application.

@node Mapping over lines, Moving, Entry point, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Mapping over lines

For the convenience of package-users, this package also provides some
auxiliary functions to operate on the displayed list.  One is
@code{ilist-map-lines}.  It is called as follows.

@lisp
(ilist-map-lines FUN &optional PREDICATE START END NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE)
@end lisp

@table @code
@item FUN
The function to execute on each matching line.
@item PREDICATE
This should be a function with no arguments.  It will be executed on
each line.  If it returns non-nil, that line is considered to be
matched.
@item START
@itemx END
They limit the range of the mapping.
@item NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE
If non-nil, then we don’t skip invisible lines.
@end table

@node Moving, Copying This Manual, Mapping over lines, Top
@comment  node-name,  next,  previous,  up
@chapter Moving

It might be desired to move between the displayed list items in a
@emph{cyclic} manner, that is, assuming the top of the buffer is
identified with the bottom of the buffer.  So the package provides
four functions for moving.  If the argument @code{NO-SKIP-INVISIBLE}
is non-nil, then we don’t skip invisible lines.

@table @code
@item ilist-backward-line
@itemx ilist-forward-line
Move between lines.  One can control whether to skip group headers or
to move cyclicly, through the function parameters.
@item ilist-backward-group-header
@itemx ilist-forward-group-header
Move between group headers.
@end table

@node Copying This Manual, Index, Moving, Top
@appendix Copying This Manual

@c Get fdl.texi from https://www.gnu.org/licenses/fdl.html
@include fdl-1.3.texi

@node Index,  , Copying This Manual, Top
@unnumbered Index

@printindex cp

@bye
